Add documentation - Main Concepts - API (#1855)
kuzzleio/kuzzle: doc/2/guides/main-concepts/1-api/index.md

### HTTP

HTTP requests are **split into the four HTTP usual parts**: URL, verb, headers and body.

Every API action documentation has a dedicated HTTP section, explaining how to use that action with the HTTP protocol.

::: info
You can add the `pretty` parameter in any HTTP URL to receive a pretty formatted JSON response. (e.g. `GET "http://localhost:7512?pretty"`)
:::

#### Optional Headers

The following list of HTTP headers can be added to any and all HTTP requests:

- `Accept-Encoding`: compression algorithm(s) usable by Kuzzle to encode the response. Accepted encodings, in order of preference: `gzip`, `deflate`, `identity`.
- `Authorization` (expected value: `Bearer <token>`): user's authentification token, obtained through the [auth:login](/core/2/api/controllers/auth/login) API action
- `Content-Encoding`: compression algorithm(s) used to encode the body sent to Kuzzle. Accepted encodings: `deflate`, `gzip`, `identity`

#### Body Encoding

Body contents can be sent in the following formats:

- `application/json`: raw JSON
- `multipart/form-data`: HTML forms; both field-value pairs and field-files pairs can be sent that way

> If a HTML form is sent that way, the **resulting body content will be translated into a JSON object**, with as many keys as the provided form fields.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Requests sent as `multipart/form-data` are internally translated into JSON objects**, where keys represents the form fields.
```

Reviewer 2: ("[...] where keys represent the form fields.")

> If the form field holds a file, then the corresponding JSON key will refer to an object instead of a mere value, with the following properties:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the form field holds a file, then the corresponding JSON key will refer to an object instead of a simple value, with the following properties:
```

- `filename`: file's name
- `encoding`: file encoding
- `mimetype`: MIME type
- `file`: file content, encoded in base64

#### JSON Query Endpoint

Kuzzle also exposes an endpoint to **send requests using the standard JSON request format** used by other protocols.  

This makes it possible to avoid the use of the REST API and to send requests via the HTTP protocol the same way as for any other protocols.

This endpoint is accessible with the route `POST /_request`:

```bash
curl -X POST -H  "Content-Type: application/json" "http://localhost:7512/_request" --data '{
  "controller":"server", 
  "action":"now" 
}'
```

The body of the request will be processed by Kuzzle as a standard request.

::: warning
This endpoint does not allow to benefit from the advantages of the cache system integrated to HTTP via URLs.
:::

---

### Other Protocols

::: info

> Kuzzle's extensible protocol system allows communication in virtually any format. This documentation section describes the format that must be used to pass requests to Kuzzle itself, either directly by users (for instance, using the embedded [WebSocket](/core/2/api/api-protocols/2-websocket) or [MQTT](/core/2/api/api-protocols/3-mqtt) protocols), or indirectly, translated by the custom protocol layer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kuzzle's extensible protocol system allows communication in virtually any format. This documentation section describes the format that must be used to send requests to Kuzzle itself, either directly by users (for instance, using the embedded [WebSocket](/core/2/api/api-protocols/2-websocket) or [MQTT](/core/2/api/api-protocols/3-mqtt) protocols), or indirectly, translated by the custom protocol layer.
```

:::

> Requests made to Kuzzle must be encoded using JSON, and have the following format:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Requests sent to Kuzzle must be encoded using JSON, and have the following format:
```

```js
{
  // required by all requests
  "controller": "<controller>",
  "action": "<action>",

  // optional, can be added to all requests
  "requestId": "<unique request identifier>",
  "jwt": "<token>",

  // commonly found parameters
  "index": "<index>",
  "collection": "<collection>",
  "body": {
    // body content
  },
  "_id": "<unique ID>"
}
```

#### Required parameters

The **following 2 parameters are required by all API requests**, as these are directly used by Kuzzle to redirect the request to the correct API action:

- `controller`: API controller name
- `action`: API controller action to be executed

Depending on the API action executed, other parameters may be required. Those are detailed in the corresponding API sections.

#### Commonly found parameters:

> There are 3 parameters that can be provided to all requests, independently to the API action executed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following 3 parameters that can be provided to all requests, independently to the API action executed:
```

> - `jwt`: user's authentification token, obtained through the [auth:login](/core/2/api/controllers/auth/login) method

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `jwt`: user authentication token, obtained through the [auth:login](/core/2/api/controllers/auth/login) method
```

> - `requestId`: user-defined request identifier. Kuzzle does not guarantee that responses are sent back in the same order than requests are made; **use that field to link responses to their request of origin**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `requestId`: user-defined request identifier. Kuzzle does not guarantee that responses are sent back in the same order than requests are made; **use this field to link responses to their request of origin**
```

- `volatile`: user-defined data, without any impact to the request. Use that object to pass information about the request itself to real-time subscribers. Read more [here](/core/2/api/essentials/volatile-data)

Additionally, a few other parameters are very commonly found in API requests:

- `_id`: unique identifier (e.g. document ID, user kuid, memory storage key, ...)
- `body`: body content (e.g. document content, message content, mappings, ...)
- `collection`: collection name
- `index`: index name

#### Other parameters

> Kuzzle does not enforce a fixed list of parameters. Rather, **API actions freely design the parameters list they need**, and Kuzzle internal structures reflect that freedom.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kuzzle does not enforce a fixed list of parameters. Rather, **API actions freely define the parameter list they need**, and Kuzzle internal structures reflect that freedom.
```

| `index`      | Index name, or `null` if no index was involved                                                      |
| `requestId`  | Request unique identifier                                                                           |
| `result`     | Action result, or `null` if an error occured                                                        |
| `status`     | Response status, using [HTTP status codes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_HTTP_status_codes) |
| `volatile`   | Arbitrary data repeated from the initial request                                                    |

**Example:** _Display the entire response content of server:now action with Kourou_

```bash
kourou sdk:request server:now --display ""

# {
#   "requestId": "60b6c20d-6cd6-4478-b2e0-5638475ae64b",
#   "status": 200,
#   "error": null,
#   "controller": "server",
#   "action": "now",
#   "collection": null,
#   "index": null,
#   "volatile": {
#     "sdkInstanceId": "d301a7c7-ed99-4ede-94c4-fb1dc2156789",
#     "sdkName": "js@7.4.1"
#   },
#   "result": {
#     "now": 1605000454514
#   }
# }
```

## Notification Format

> Kuzzle offers the possibility to **receive real-time notifications** through its [Realtime Engine](/core/2/guides/main-concepts/6-realtime-engine).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kuzzle enables to **receive real-time notifications** through its [Realtime Engine](/core/2/guides/main-concepts/6-realtime-engine).
```

There are 3 types and formats of notifications:
 - document
 - user
 - server

### Document Notification

> Thoses notifications are either volatile [Pub/Sub](/core/2/guides/main-concepts/6-realtime-engine#pub-sub) messages or [Database Notifications](/core/2/guides/main-concepts/6-realtime-engine#database-notifications) occuring when documents change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These notifications are either volatile [Pub/Sub](/core/2/guides/main-concepts/6-realtime-engine#pub-sub) messages or [Database Notifications](/core/2/guides/main-concepts/6-realtime-engine#database-notifications) occurring when documents change.
```

| Property         | Type     | Description                                                                                 |
|------------------|----------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `_id`            | string   | Document unique ID<br/>`null` if the notification is from a real-time message               |
| `_source`        | object   | The message or full document content. Not present if the event is about a document deletion |
| `_updatedFields` | string[] | List of fields that have been updated (only available on document partial updates)          |

**Example:** _Document notification_
```js
{
  "index": "tir-open-data",
  "collection": "red-taxi",
  "controller": "document",
  "action": "create",
  "protocol": "http",
  "timestamp": 1497513122738,
  "volatile": null,
  "scope": "in",
  "result":{
    "_source":{
      "some": "document content",
      "_kuzzle_info": {
        "author": "-1",
        "createdAt": 1497866996975
      }
    },
    "_id": "<document identifier>"
  },
  "room":"893e183fc7acceb5-7a90af8c8bdaac1b"
}
```

> ### User Notification

Reviewer: "user" is wrong. We should be talking about "client" here

It's meant to be **used by low-level languages** to efficiently catch specific error codes and act on them.

Code format:
- Domain: ranges from `00` to `FF` (1 byte)
- Subdomain: ranges from `00` to `FF` (1 byte)
- Error: ranges from `0000` to `FFFF` (2 bytes)

The complete list of API errors is available [here](/core/2/api/essentials/error-codes/).

## Volatile Data

All requests accept a `volatile` object in parameter.

The content of this object is not meant to be used directly: it has no impact on the request itself.

Still, volatile data are not completely ignored by Kuzzle, and they have a few uses.

### Request Context

Volatile data can be used to **provide additional context about a request**; this allows **extended logs**, **application metadata**, and so on. Many use cases benefit from being able to pass context data, without any direct impact to requests themselves.

Lastly, if a request triggers a [document notification](/core/2/guides/main-concepts/1-api#document-notification), then its **volatile data are included in the notification content**. This allows real-time subscribers to get elements of context about changes made to documents, if needs be.

::: info

> By default, SDKs includes two fields in the request volatile data:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, SDKs include two fields in the request volatile data:
```

 - `sdkInstanceId`: unique identifier for this SDK instance
 - `sdkName`: SDK name and version
:::

### Realtime Subscription Context

> There is one special case, where volatile data are stored by Kuzzle for a later use, instead of being completely ignored: whenever a client make a new real-time subscription.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is one special case, where volatile data are stored by Kuzzle for a later use, instead of being completely ignored: whenever a client makes a new real-time subscription.
```

Volatile data passed to a new subscription query are used two times by Kuzzle:

> - if the new subscription triggers [document notification](/core/2/guides/main-concepts/1-api#user-notification), its volatile data are included into those

Reviewer: And what about volatile data that might be sent along with the request that triggered the document notification? Are them merged together?

Reviewer 2: I missed that one. It's because volatile data passed to subscriptions are forwarded to subsequent user notifications (and not in document notifications)

- if that subscription is cancelled, whether because of a call to [realtime:unsubscribe](/core/2/api/controllers/realtime/unsubscribe), or after the client disconnects: the volatile data provided **at the time of the subscription** are once again copied into user notifications triggered by that event

This allows other realtime subscribers to get context information about a client joining or leaving the same subscription as them.

## Limits

Kuzzle API has several protection mechanisms against Denial of Service Attacks (DoS).

These mechanisms are regulated by [configurable](/core/2/guides/advanced/8-configuration) limits.

### Concurrent Requests

> Kuzzle has a limited number of requests that can be processed in parallel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kuzzle limits the number of requests that can be processed in parallel.
```

Once this number of requests is reached, new requests are stored in a queue before they can be processed when a slot becomes available.

**Associated configuration keys:**
 - `limits.concurrentRequests` (`50`): number of requests Kuzzle processes simultaneously
 - `limits.requestsBufferSize` (`50000`): maximum number of requests that can be buffered
 - `limits.requestsBufferWarningThreshold` (`5000`):number of buffered requests after which Kuzzle will throw [core:overload](/core/2/some-link) events

> ### Documents Limits

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Document Limits
```

> Kuzzle limite le nombre de documents pouvant être lu ou écrit avec la même requête.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kuzzle limits the number of events that can be read or written within the same request.  
```
